1) How do you containerize your application using docker?
1) --> first i will understand the application- whether its java , node js , python, check dependancies , configuration files, and build
tools like maven or npm.
2) write a dockerfile- i will create a dockerfile in root directory of project. for java app i will use multi state dockerfile.

3) build the image:-
docker build -t myapp:latest .

4)run the container locally:-
docker run -p 8080:8080 myapp:latest   -- this helps verify that the app is running.

5) optimize the image: i try to reduce the image size using multistage docker build and using slim base image.
6) push to registry:- once tested i tag and push the image to docker Hub or AWS ECR.
7) use in CI CD- Finally i integrate the docker build and push to jenkins pipeline so that every code push triggers the pipeline 
build the image and push it to registry automatically.


2) what is kubernetes and how does it works?

Kubernetes, often called K8s, is an open-source container orchestration platform. It helps automate the deployment, scaling, 
and management of containerized applications — like Docker containers.

Containers: First, you have your application packaged in a container (e.g., using Docker).
Pods: In Kubernetes, containers run inside pods, which are the smallest deployable units.
Cluster: A Kubernetes cluster consists of:
Master Node (Control Plane) – manages the cluster
Worker Nodes – run the actual applications (pods)

Scheduler & Controller:
The scheduler decides where pods should run (on which node).
Controllers ensure the desired state matches the actual state (e.g., if a pod crashes, it will restart it).
Kubelet:
Each worker node has a kubelet, which communicates with the control plane and runs the pods.

Services:
Kubernetes uses services to expose your pods to other parts of the application or the internet.

Configuration via YAML:

You define the desired state of your applications using YAML files (like Deployment, Service, Ingress).

Kubernetes reads these files and maintains that desired state automatically.



3) What is a Helm Chart?
Helm is a package manager for Kubernetes, and a Helm Chart is like a template or blueprint for deploying an application on a 
Kubernetes cluster.

It helps you package, configure, and deploy Kubernetes resources in a repeatable and maintainable way — 
just like how apt or yum works for Linux packages, but for Kubernetes.

How It Works:
A Helm Chart contains:

YAML templates for Kubernetes objects (e.g., Deployments, Services, ConfigMaps)
values.yaml file for customization (like image names, replicas, ports)
Chart metadata (name, version, etc.)
Instead of writing multiple YAML files manually, you define them as templates in a chart and pass custom values to them.

4) How do you monitor applications and infrastructure?
 
 i have set up monitoring for both application and infrastructure using prometheus , grafana and cloudwatch

 🔹 Infrastructure Monitoring:
for cloud monitoring i use cloudwatch. cloudwatch tracking metrics such as cpu usage, memory , disk, network traffic, health checks
then i have created cloudwatch alarms for critical threshold and integrated with slack.
for k8 cluster i used prometheus to scrape metrics from node, pod, services using exporters,
Node exporter - for system level metrics
kube state metrics - for cluster health
cAadvisor -  for container level metrics

🔹 Application Monitoring:
for application level monitoring i used prometheus and grafana  setup'
prometheus collects metrics exposed by application via /metrics endpoint
grafana visualise it using custom dashboard
we also configure alert rules in prometheus and sent alerts to slack.


5 ) what is infratsrure as code?

-- we create infrastructure using code. normally we created infra like EC2 with manual process. here with using visual studio 
we write code that describe infrastructure which can be version controlled , reusable , and reviewed. 
to make reusable infrastructure and faster deployment  there are several tools in market. aws and azure having their own tool. 
aws is having cloud formation template which only limited for aws only
azure is having arm template which only limited azure only.
open source tool which i am using is terraform and supports multicloud.terraform supports muliple providers.

6 ) how do you manage terraform state securely?
terraform stores infrastructure state in a terraform.tfstate file, which represent the current state of cloud resources.
by default this file stored locally which is not secure or scalable for team environement or production use.
to manage it securely , we configure remote backend using amazon s3 with version enabled. this ensures that if the file
is accidently deleted or corrupted , previous version can be recovered.
additionally we use DynamoDB for state locking which prevents multiple team members from making simultaneous changes to the same
state - avoiding race condition and conflicts.
we also enforce encryption (SSE-S3 or SSE-KMS) and apply bucket policies to restrict access, ensuring the state file remains secure.


what is ansible and how is it used in devops?

Ansible is an open-source configuration management, provisioning, and automation tool. It allows DevOps engineers to 
automate repetitive tasks like installing packages, managing users, configuring files, and deploying applications.

It's agentless, meaning it doesn't require any software to be installed on the target nodes — it uses SSH to 
communicate with Linux systems.
in devops pipeline ansible is commonly used for ,
configuration management:- ensuring all servers have consistent configuration- (installing nginx, setting up env variable)
provisioning infrastructure- after creating infrastructure with terraform . ansible will be use to configure it.


What are Blue-Green and Canary Deployments?
Blue-Green Deployment is a release strategy used to reduce downtime and risk during application deployment. 
It involves maintaining two identical production environments:

Blue: The current live version.
Green: The new version to be deployed.

We deploy the new version to the Green environment and test it thoroughly. Once verified, we switch the traffic from 
Blue to Green, making the new version live instantly. If something goes wrong, we can quickly roll back by redirecting 
traffic back to Blue.

Benefits:
Near-zero downtime.
Instant rollback in case of failure.
Seamless user experience.

Canary Deployment is a more gradual release strategy. Instead of routing 100% of traffic to the new version immediately, 
 release it to a small subset of users (say 5-10%). If the system performs well (based on metrics like latency, error rate, etc.),
  we gradually increase traffic until 100% is served by the new version.

Benefits:
Reduces risk by catching issues early.
Allows performance and behavior monitoring in real user scenarios.
Supports progressive rollouts.

When to Use:

Use Blue-Green when you want fast switchover with a clean rollback.
Use Canary when you need to minimize risk in high-traffic applications by validating performance with real users incrementally.

How I used Blue-Green and Canary Deployments in my project
In my recent project, I worked on deploying a Java-based microservices application on AWS EKS using Jenkins and ArgoCD. We implemented both Blue-Green and Canary deployments depending on the criticality and nature of the service.

🔵 Blue-Green Deployment (Used for critical services like Authentication & Payment):
We used Kubernetes services with two versions of the deployment — blue (live) and green (new release).

I first deployed the new version (green) to a separate Kubernetes deployment with the same configuration.
We validated the green environment with smoke tests and health checks.
Once validated, I switched the Kubernetes service selector from the blue pods to the green pods — effectively routing all traffic to the new version.
In case of any issue, rollback was instant by pointing the service back to the blue pods.
We used ArgoCD for GitOps-based deployments and kept both environments in version-controlled manifests.

🟡 Canary Deployment (Used for non-critical services or high-traffic APIs):
For canary rollouts, we used Argo Rollouts with Kubernetes.
I configured the rollout strategy in the manifest to start with 10% traffic going to the new version.
Based on Prometheus and Grafana metrics (error rate, latency, CPU/memory usage), traffic was gradually increased to 25%, 50%, and finally 100%.
If any anomaly was detected, Argo Rollouts would automatically pause or roll back to the previous stable version.
This approach helped us reduce risk and gain confidence before full deployment.

⚙️ Tools Used:
Jenkins (CI)
ArgoCD and Argo Rollouts (CD)
Kubernetes (EKS)
Prometheus & Grafana (Monitoring)
AWS ALB for Blue-Green traffic switching (in some cases)

Que) how do you implement secret management in kubernetes?
 in kubernetes password , api keys, certificates, token are called as secrets.
 1) Native k8s secrets:-
 i use kubectl and yaml manifests to create k8s secrets.
 these are base64-encoded and stored in etcd . this method is very easy to use but lacks strong encryption.
 
 2) using external secret management tool-
 i used hashicorp vault for more secure, scalable, and auditable secret handling.

hashicorp vault:-
i use vault to securely store and dynamically generate secrets.
then i use vault agent injector to inject secrets into pods at runtime avoiding hardcoding secrets in manifests.

benifit- secrets are fetched at runtime, rotate automatically and access it tightly controlled with policies.

Que) what is load balancer and how does it work in cloud?
 As name suggested the main function is balancing traffic load coming from external world to inside application.
 load balancer distribute incoming traffic into multiple server to balance traffic load and to avoid any server becomes bottleneck.
 load balancer balancing incoming http/ https or tcp/udp traffic acorss backend servers (ec2 instance, containers , pods)
 load balancer monitoring backend targets and routes traffic only to healthy ones.
 if one instance fails traffic is automatically rerouted to healthy ones without downtime.

 Que) How do you use Git in your devops workflow?
 Git is version control system which is called source of truth for application code.
 Git is used to manage application code and infrastructure as code (terraform script, ansible playbook, helm chart)
 in CICD integration Git is integrated with securely with jenkins using token or webhooks.
 on every changes in Git (push or merge) jenkins pipeline will trigger to update changes. jenkins keep maintain state with git
 repository.
 in kubernetes environemt we have used GitOps tools like ArgoCD to sync cluster state from a Git repository.
 the Git repo becomes single source of truth for kubernetes manifest.


Que) - what is the difference between monolith and microservice architecture?

In a monolithic architecture, all components (frontend, backend, database access, etc.) are tightly coupled and part of the 
same application. So, if one part like the backend fails, it can bring down the entire application, including the 
frontend — because everything runs as a single unit.

In a microservices architecture, the application is split into independent services — for example, user service, payment service, 
order service, etc. If one microservice goes down (like payment service), the rest of the application can still function — 
like viewing products or adding to cart — as long as those services are healthy. This is because services are isolated 
from each other and communicate through APIs.
Each microservice runs in multiple replicas (pods) behind a load balancer (like in Kubernetes).
So if one replica fails, traffic is routed to healthy ones — ensuring no downtime.


Que) difference between statefulset and deployment in kubernetes?

both are used to manage pods.
Depoyment -
is used for stateless application. deployment creates pods with random name, can scale quickly and use ephemeral 
storage.
web server , backend stateless services. 
Statefullsets- 
are used for stateful application.
stateful application need to retain data and maintain stable identity.
each pod in statefulset has stable hostname
A pod is having dedicated persistent volume that stays even if the pod restarts.
pod restarts and shutdown takes place in ordered fashion.
which is important for clustered system like database or zookeeper'
i would use stateful to deploy mongodb chuster.

Que ) centarized version control system and distributed version 
Centralized VCS (CVCS):
in centarized version control system there is single central repository where the entire codebase and history are stored.
developers have to connect to this central server to perform operation like commit , update or revert.
that means if the  central server goes down or is inaccessible , no one can commit or retrive history. which creates a bottleneck

Distributed VCS (DVCS):-
distributed vCS is having feature to allow developer clone the entire repository including the full history to thier local machine.
so developer can commit, view logs , or create branches locally without needing constant connection to central server.
once their chaages are ready they pushed to remote git repository.

Que ) can you explain concept of cicd pipeline in details?

"In my current project, we follow a complete CI/CD pipeline built using Jenkins integrated with GitHub, Docker, and Kubernetes. 
The goal is to automate the entire lifecycle — from code commit to production deployment — while ensuring quality and 
 at every stage.

 continuous integration-CI-  i have worked on github in my recent project. whenever a developer creates new pull request or pushes 
 code to a feature branch it triggers jenkins pipeline automatically via webhooks.

 the CI pipeline includes -
  code checkout
  install dependancies
  unit testing
  static code analysis
  docker image creation
  docker image push to ECR

  if any of these above step fails , the pipeline stops nd notifies the team via slack and eamil.

  Continuous Delivery (CD):
"Once the image is successfully built and pushed, the next stage handles deployment to a staging Kubernetes environment 
using Helm charts."

We apply:

Helm for Kubernetes deployments

Namespace separation for environments (dev/staging/prod)

ConfigMaps/Secrets templated in Helm

"Before deployment to production, we have a manual approval gate in Jenkins — this ensures a human reviews everything before 
release."


Que ) Can you discuss your experience with Devops tools like jenkins , docker , kubernetes , and tearraform?

Que ) what are branching startegies in version control system?




























