you need to find out why a server is running slowly. what steps would you take?
--- we will use below command to troubleshoot ths issue.
top /htop -- we will check cpu load, memory usage and do indentify any process consuming excessive resource.
iostat and iotop -- to check disk i/o 
free -m - for memory usage 
df -h  - for disk space
netstat or ss - to check any network related issue.
/var/log - to review system logs for any errors or warnings.


Que --) A users home directory is filling up disk space on the root partition. how would you resolve this?
--Check the disk usage with du -sh /home/user to identify large files or directories.
if possible move large files to another partition with more space using mv or rsync.
alternatively advise the user to delete or compress (tar , gzip ) unnecessary files. 

Que ) -- SSH service on server is being targeted by brute force attacks what steps would you take to minimise this?
--Change the default port from 22 to something less common in /etc/ssh/sshd_config
--implement key-based authentication and disable password authentication.
use fail2ban to block ips after a certein number of failed login attempts.
allow only specific IP addresses to connect using ip tables or ufw.

Que) you need to do automate backup of directory to remote server.how would you do it?
use rsync for efficient file transfrer.set up ssh key based authentication between local and remote server.
write a script to run rsync with the desired option and schedule it using cron by adding a cron job(crontab -e)4

Que) Critical server has crashed and wont restart.what steps do you take to troubleshoot and resolve the issue?
-- Check the status and logs of the service using systemctl status servicename and journalctl -u servicename.
-- looks for any configuration errors or missing dependancies.
verify the  configuration file syntax (nginx-t for nginx apachectl configtest for apache)
resolve any issue found and restart the service with systemctl restart servicename.

Que ) you need to create a new user and ensure they have no shell access. how would you do this?
     useradd -s /sbin/nologin username

Que) your server is running out of memory and starting to swap heavily. what actions would you take?
First identify which processes of using high memory.
identify memory hopping processes using top or ps aux --sort=-%mem
then consider stoping and restarting these processes.
Increase swap space by creating new swap file if needed.
optimize application memory usage or add more physical memory to the server.

Que ) you need to restrict a users disk usage. how would you implement this?



que)   A service needs to start on boot how would you ensure this?
Enable the service using systecmtl enable servicename. this create symlinks for the service to start on boot.
verify the systemctl is-enabled servicename.

que) web server showing 502 bad gateway error. what steps do you take to troubleshoot?
--> check the status of both the web server (Nginx) and the backend service it proxies to (eg php)
verify the backend service is reachable and accessible check configuration file for any misconfigurations.
ensure sufficient resources (memory , cpu ) are available.


Que)  you need to schedule a recurring task to clean temporary files. how would you do this?
write a script to clean temporary files (#!/bin/bash \n rm -rf /tmp/*)
make it executable ( chmod +x scriptname.sh)
add a cronjob to execute the script at desired intervals using crontab -e (* * * * *)
/path/to/scriptname.sh

